In this video I'm going to show you just how easy it is to create a Spring Framework project.
Now in my early days with the Spring Framework and this is going back a few years unfortunately. The
Spring Framework has been around for a long time. When I started using the Spring Framework around
Version 2, if I remember right, we did not have anything like Spring Initializr. Everything you had
to do would be hand rolled, so you'd have to go through and create a brand new Maven project, go out and
research the stack of dependencies that you needed to bring into the project to wire up these different
Spring components.
What Spring Initializr does is it goes out and gives you common options for common things that you're
gonna be bringing in. So you might want to have like Thymeleaf being brought into your project. You're going to
do a Spring web project.
These are all sets of dependencies that we can wire up with the Spring Initializr. What it's going
to do is form up the project and give you options of Spring down either a Maven build or Gradle build
and assemble a project for you.
And in just a few mouse clicks you can do effectively do would take me back 10 15 years ago an afternoon
of research and assembling all these dependencies.
So this is just such a huge time saver to have this type of technology now.
It's really amazing especially for me coming from the old days where you had to do all this manually.
So you guys are gonna be a little bit spoiled. So let's jump over and take a look at the Spring Initializr
project on GitHub and talk more about its capabilities.
Spring Initializr is an open source project of course and you can see the project up
here on GitHub. If you want go and review the project yourself.
Actually I just found it by googling Spring Initializr. They do spell it funny without an E
between the Z and the R.
I think that's a possibly a European thing to spell that way.
In the States we use an E there. But here is the project and if you come down to the read me, you can
get all information about the project itself and what's in there, the different modules. But the main
thing you're going to be interested in is generating a project and there's actually several different
techniques that you can do to generate a project. You can check this out, run locally and you can run
curl commands against start.spring.io to download this and there's a number of different parameters.
And I'm not going to get into how to use this from the command line.
That's a little beyond the scope that I want to do.
We will take a look at the web interface but the primary takeaway that I wanted you to get away from
this is that there is an open source project behind it.
You can use it programmatically or go to the website and use it.
A lot of the IDEs do have an integration so they can abstract that for you which is nice or you can
go to start.spring.io
and we'll be taking a look at that specifically in an upcoming segment of this lesson.
Now one of the core things behind Spring Initializr are the Spring Boot Starters. Spring Boot Starters
are basically a curated set of dependencies and we'll be talking about this throughout the course as
curated set of dependencies.
Very very powerful concept.
So if you remember I said in the beginning when I had to do all this manually, what Spring is giving
us are basically Maven BOMs that give us a bill of material, a set of known components that work together.
Like if we want to bring in JMS messaging into to our Spring application, we would include a dependency
on this Spring Boot Starter and we'd bring in the different components that I would need to connect
that particular flavor of JMS.
So I'm going to do now is jump over to the browser and take a look at some of these dependencies and
show you how they work as to how Spring is organizing these and the number of different dependencies
that you can bring in. Because Java is such a large community, you do have a number of options to select
from.
You can see up my screen here that I do have GitHub up. This is the Spring Boot project and you can
see I'm in the sub directory for Spring Boot Starters.
Now all of these here are different starters that are available.
So we have ActiveMQ, AMPQP, different cloud connectors, JDBC, Solr, FreeMarker, so you can see a lot
of very common popular open source projects so let's come in here and take a look at the ActiveMQ one
here. And this is just a Maven POM and let's take a look at this POM and you'll see and here this has
dependencies listed.
So this is saying that I need the Spring Boot Starter. I also need Spring JMS and I need an ActiveMQ broker
and they're doing an exclusion there as well as Jakarta JMS.
So this brings an implementation of the JMS API.
These are the different dependencies that you would need to bring up an ActiveMQ messaging.
So this is a very nice thing.
Without this, what we'd have to do is include all these interdependencies.
So what's going to be happening is this works with the Maven dependency management to bring these libraries
into our project for us and make these dependencies.
So just by including this dependency in, we get all these other dependencies.
So if you're a little confused on how dependencies work within a Maven environment, I do have an
entire course on Maven and we will be talking about more on this course.
But in that other course I do dive into this deeply.
The main takeaway here is to understand that we do have what is called a bill of materials and the Spring
Boot Starter brings in the different components that we are going to be working with for our Spring
Framework project. Your watch Josh Long speak who is a developer advocate for Pivotal who promotes the
Spring Framework to developers talking all over the world.
His favorite website in the world is start.spring.io
This is the web site that is hosted by Pivotal for us to use to go and create Spring Framework projects.
It's a very nice web site. And underneath the covers, what's happening there is remember in that first
segment of this lesson we looked at Spring Initializr.
This is just a web front end on Spring Initializr.
So there's a web application that we can use and select the components that we want in our Spring Boot
project.
The components being the Spring Boot Starters that we want to include and this is going to give us an
artifact a zip file all zipped up of a starter project for us to start developing out with the pre configured
dependencies based on our selections.
So let's go over to the Web and take a look at start.spring.io. Okay, you can see up on the screen.
I have navigated to start.spring.io
Josh Long's favorite website in the entire world.
So let's take a look at some of the features of this website.
And just as a caveat, this is the latest edition of the website circa December 2019.
As you progress in the course, you will see some older versions. I'm trying to update those videos but
I am quite gotten to it yet and this may change in the future as well. They've actually been evolving
this UI quite a bit and they made some really nice changes to it.
So let's take a look at some of the features. Right at the top here you do have some links and you do
have an option to toggle dark UI and light UI. And then you can jump to GitHub.
We already looked at that. Twitter or a different help options.
Now the project generation you have an option of a Maven project and a Gradle project. We'll primarily
stick with Maven for right now as our build tool. You do have language options for Java Kotllin
and Groovy.
We will be sticking with Java.
Now you can see the different versions of Spring Boot that are available for us to use in this tool.
For purpose of this course,
do not use the snapshot versions.
I pick a Spring Boot 2.2.2 or higher.
And that's what we'll be focusing on as much as possible in the course.
And then here you have a section on Project Metadata. You have the group artefact and then options.
I think by default that's going to be collapse like that.
So you can expand that out and set up a name for your project description, default package name, and then
also if you want packaging of jar or war. We will be focusing and using the executable jars in this course.
So a nice feature of Spring Boot.
We'll be talking about that as we get further into the course. Java versions.
A lot of companies are still on Java 8. Most of this course is on originally developed on Java 8. Java
11 is starting to be adopted.
I will be starting to move forward with Java 11 updating the course to Java 11. Java 13.
I am not going to be using that release. Java 11 is a long term support release so I will be
focusing on supporting the LTS releases of Java.
If you want to use Java 13, you're probably safe but I will not be talking about any Java 13 specific
features. I'll only update to the LTS releases of Java. Now Dependencies. Here, you can come down.
You can do a search. You can do things like let's do like rabbit. You can see here it brings up different
options for rabbit.
Primarily a Spring for RabbitMQ.
If you think a major open source project you type that in and search on it or you have the option to
come in here and click on this list and now you can see all these different things.
And behind these are Spring Boot Starter or a set of Spring Boot Starters.
In here you can see development tools. Lombok will definitely be playing with that coming up in the
course.
Web, Reactive, then you have different template engines, securities, SQL, NoSQL, Messaging. So you
can see there's a lot of options, a lot of different things that we can do with the Spring Framework.
Obviously we are not going to be covering each and every one of these options. We'll be using a very
small set of these.
There are a number of pre configured options for working with Spring Framework projects.
Obviously Spring is very very popular.
So there's a lot of options that we can utilize.
What we're going to be doing in this section of the course is just building a simple web application
and we'll start talking about that in the next section of the course.
So a lot of options there inside of Spring Initializr.
I'd imagine it can be a little bit overwhelming.
Don't worry we are going to start off with some very small and very simple just to get her feet wet
with the Spring Framework.
So what I want to do is build a very simple web application in this section of the course so we're gonna
jump over Spring Initializr and grab the dependencies and the starters that we need to do.
Just a simple web application. And by a web application, I want to be able to build a web page and have
it back with the database and get that other database. So nothing earth shattering to do there
but we're going to go through it step by step and use Spring Initializr to create that initial project
for us.
And what I'm going to show you is really literally took me at least a half a day to do. Back before we
had the Spring Initializr tool. Okay, I'm back at start.io so I'm going to come in
here and create a project. I want a Maven project and I want Java and then let's do 2.2.2.
That is the most current example. I'm going to name my group guru dot.
Remember that is just a common Java convention to use the reverse of your domain name for the group
and let's call this spring5webapp like so and let's look at the options. spring5webapp. Then we'll say
simple web application and package name is defaulting to the group I.D. and the name of the application
so that's perfectly fine with me. We are gonna stick with an executable jar and then let's take this
to Java 11. If you have Java 8 installed, go ahead and use Java 8. Probably won't you get into a Java
11 specific features. And let's see here.
Let's expand out the dependencies make this a little bit easier on ourselves. We're not gonna need
any developer tools.
We do want Spring Web so that is going to bring in Spring MVC and let's come down here and let's come down
to SQL. We are going to be working with Spring Data JPA to make our lives a lot easier.
So we'll add that in. The only other thing I want to bring in is the H2 Database.
This is gonna give us an in-memory database. And that is all my selections. So you can see here we've
got three selected.
Just go and double check.
OK so let's go ahead and I'm going to say generate. Click on this generate tab right here down at the
bottom. You can see it look at the bottom of my screen it has brought down a zip file. So it's a nice zip
file contains a pre configured project for us. So you can see how easy it was to generate a Spring Framework
project going over to start.spring.io.
Just a few map mouse clicks and a little bit of typing.
I was able to generate my projects so I brought down that zip file. Inside that zip file is a fully functional
Spring Framework project using the Maven build tool.
I think if memory serves me right all you would need to have is Java installed on your system. It does
come with Maven wrapper so you could use the shell script to actually execute this on a system that
does not have Maven installed but only has Java installed.
So this is very simple.
This literally is a huge time saver compared to doing all these steps manually.
So let's go over and take a look at what's inside that zip file.
What in the Spring Initializr provided us for our Spring web project.
Okay.
You can see that I've gone into my downloads directory and here on the screen I have opened up this spring
5 web app and you see this is all files that were inside that zip file. Any zip utility will open
this file just fine for you.
I have a .gitignore and here's .mvn so this is where the Maven wrapper is. A little Help
markdown file. And then two files here,
mvnw, that is for PASOK systems so if you're on OSX or Mac OS now and it keeps calling OSX, that
is the file that you'll run. Linux as well. Or Windows you'd want the command file to execute that
and that run Maven for you. We can see here I have a Maven pom file. We'll be taking a look at that coming
up in a different video.
And then here we have a source folder.
This is the Maven standard project layout source main.
Then I have Java.
And then you can see here's my package.
That is the package that we entered in. A Java class. And also here, we'll get a project directory of
resources.
So we have application properties.
And if we had any template we'd put there or static web resources, it generate those because we selected
the web projects so it gave us those directories.
And then also here we have test. So these are the tests and we have a standard project and then a
setup of a test class of the stuff that was in that file.
We'll take a look at these.
What's the contents of these files once you get it into IntelliJ.
Give us a little easier time to discuss that to Java class as one as the main class.
And then the other is a test class and we'll take a look at those as well as the Maven dependencies
that are being brought into the project in an upcoming video.